Once around
QB1. So back in 1992, a series of
photographic images were taken and we
have three of them on the right hand
side here from the 27th and 28th of
September.
And what you can see amongst all the
other changes between the images is that
there is a moving dot circled there with
a little ring around it to make it easy
to pick out which is changed position
from image to image. And bearing in mind
the times of the images and the gaps,
the intervals between them, this was
shown to be moving at a constant speed
and therefore an object of interest. It
was given the pre designation of
1992 QB1 1992 the year of discovery and
the letters tell you the sequence during
the
year. So this was recognized as the
first TNO trans neptunian object after
Pluto and it was discovered by David
Jwitt and Jane Lou shown there using the
2.2 2 m telescope in the Monaya
Observatory in
Hawaii. So 1992, well Pluto was
discovered in 1930. So this was 62 years
since an object beyond Neptune had been
found. So it was quite a breakthrough
really.
Now, David and Jane wanted to call it
Smiley after Charles Hugh Smiley, a
famous astronomer and document of
planets. But that name had already been
used for an asteroid belt object,
asteroid 1613.
But soon after the discovery and the
characterization of the orbit of this
object QB1, it was recognized as a
possible candidate for being the 10th
planet of the solar
system. That was because we had at the
time nine planets. We had the uh inner
planets Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars. The
outer planets Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus,
and Neptune. And Pluto was of course
included as the ninth planet at this
time. And you can see in the diagram,
the red lines are Jupiter, Saturn,
Uranus, and Neptune's orbit. The black
line with the dashes, that's Pluto. and
QB1 is marked with the blue orbit going
around. Now, it's interesting
because the orbit varies. It's slightly
elliptical, 40 to 47 AU, the Earth sun
distance. Neptune's orbit is about 30
AU. And then Pluto's well it dives
within the orbit of Neptune from time to
time and at the moment is just climbing
away moving out towards the uh far
distant part of its orbit where it
crosses out beyond the orbit of QB1. So
Pluto is definitely in an orbit crossing
path whereas QB1 is in a much more
circular path with a very low
eccentricity. the E factor, the
elliptical nature of the orbit is only
0.07. So that's really is a much more
planetlike orbit. And to discover an
object out there in what looks like a
planet-like orbit of 291 years and 341
days was quite a revelation.
But it wasn't very long because the next
year several more objects were found in
similar orbits. We have 1993 SB, SC, FW,
and RO. And over the next 20 years,
another thousand or more objects were
discovered in this region between 30 and
50 times the Earth's sun
distance, 30 to 50 AU. And this
confirmed the existence of the Kiper
belt. It's been hypothesized since
Gerald Kiper predicted the existence of
this second asteroid belt out beyond
Neptune back in the 1940s. And the only
real member of it that we had was Pluto
uh for about 60 years until QB1 came
along and that really opened the
floodgates and suddenly we had thousands
of new objects forming this new asteroid
belt.
Now, since then, we've been studying the
orbits of these Kiper belt objects,
these trans neptunian objects, and a
pattern seems to have emerged. And this
all relates to the ratio of their
orbital periods, their year length
compared to that of Neptune. Pluto has
turned out to be in a
3:2 ratio with Neptune. So for every
three laps that Neptune does, Pluto does
two. And QB1 turned out to be in an
orbit which was in a 3:5
ratio. So we now call things that are in
the 2:3 ratio with Neptune Plutinos. And
after QB1, we call things in 3:5 ratios
QBNOS. I absolutely love that term. I
think that's very creative. And there
are some objects in 2:1 resonances. So
those get called two tinos. Um, somebody
really was quite creative with thinking
all of this up. So QB1, is it a big
object? Well, we don't have very much
information. Actually, we know its
distance, 40 to 47 astronomical units.
We know how bright it is. And we assume
that it reflects about 90% of the light
which hits it. And this gives us a
diameter of
about 167 kilometers, about 100
miles. Some people say it's a little bit
smaller than that. Some say it's a
little bit bigger. The estimates have
varied between 100 and 250
km. So quite a sizable object getting on
for the size of an asteroid like Vesta
in the inner asteroid belt. But so far
we have not obtained any really precise
information. No light curves, no
rotation periods are known. So there's
an opportunity to go and find out more.
And in fact, the image on the right here
is the best image that I can find of
this little interesting Kiper belt
object. The first Kiper belt object
after Pluto to be
discovered. 1992 QB1.
now given a formal
name
15760 Albian named after an island
dwelling uh deity created by uh William
Blake in his mythology. So, this was uh
published finally in 2018 by the Miner
Planet Center, giving us a formal name
for this object, but I still love
calling it QB1, especially because of
all those QBNos. I don't really want to
call them
Albonos or something like that. But
anyway, I hope you've enjoyed that
little trip to the Kiper Belt and to
1992 QB1.
Thanks very much for listening and I
hope you enjoyed it.